
Class Idea()


Where is


Dream Triangles: A thought experiment
By Vardaman S. Fish

TL;DR: (△ ⊃ △) ∧ (△ ⊃ △) ∧ (an oneiric △ ⊃ △)

One night you have a vivid dream. You are walking down a corridor. At the end of the corridor you can see a triangle, stencilled in bright red paint upon a white wall. You come right up close to it and touch it. The red paint is glossy, in contrast to the white matte of the rest of the wall. You run your finger around it, tracing its equal lines and turning with each of its angles.

physical triangles exist in physical world
mental triangles exist only in the mental world, but feel real in a dream

The dream triangle, however, is never rendered as a triangle on any physical medium.
dream triangle, as it is manifested in the dream, exists without being physically instantiated.

"where is the idea of dream triangle in the computer's mind physically instantiated?"
dream triangle doesn't exist in physical sense,

 it's not comparable to a triangle simulated on a computer
 unlike a drawing of a horse, which wouldn't usually be understood as actually being a horse

Even if a computer were conscious and had its own internal dream triangle, this wouldn’t necessarily be relevant. If the computer were a conscious being and saw the triangle in its mind, just like we might do, then now the question would be "where is the dream triangle in the computer's mind physically instantiated?" The response might be "in the code" or “in the activity of the hardware”, but then of course the point is that triangles are always physically instantiated as triangles. If we opened up the computer, we would not see the triangle it is dreaming of instantiated, as a triangle, in its circuit boards. It seems we are left with either having to accept that the dream triangle doesn't exist in some sense, leading to some kind of particularly strong eliminativism (a price I suspect many wouldn’t be willing to pay), or that it does exist, but isn't instantiated, as a triangle, in the physical, therefore making dream triangles exceptional from all other manifestations of triangles. For those who claim there is nothing more nor less than the physical, it is difficult to accept that the latter could be considered anything other than special pleading.

Why is it special pleading? Because it allows that there could be a triangle whose physical instantiation is without the geometric properties that constitute a triangle, something that does not occur with triangles anywhere else in reality other than in the case of a dream triangle and its neural correlates. As we've established, it's not comparable to a triangle simulated on a computer. Of course, this lack of isomorphism doesn't exclusively apply to triangles, or shapes of any kind, and there is no need for any kind of realism about shapes for the thought experiment to work. It's just that the triangle happens to be a nice and simple concept, and it seems less meaningful to talk about a "re-presentation" of the shape we call "triangle", as a "re-presentation" of the shape we call a triangle could more simply be understood as just a triangle (unlike a drawing of a horse, which wouldn't usually be understood as actually being a horse). This hopefully avoids getting into the weeds with questions about representation. In essence, the dream triangle thought experiment is just a very simple way of making a point that could be made with horses rather than triangles. The problem is that someone could argue back that a dream horse isn't a real horse, but just the representation of one. It’s true that you could then counter this by saying that although the dream horse isn't a real horse, there is still a question of how its representation is instantiated physically in the case of the dream and its NCCs (neural correlates of consciousness). But this would potentially be a much more convoluted way of presenting the argument. The point of using the example of the dream triangle is simply that saying a triangle isn't really a triangle seems very strange, if not so contradictory as to be meaningless.

Another counter argument might be something along the lines of "but no triangle is really a perfect triangle". But this would be to miss the point, which is to use the triangle as an example only because it is very simply delineated. Theoretically, you could substitute it with anything, as the thought experiment is simply intended to illustrate that the lack of isomorphism between NCCs and mental phenomena is highly exceptional, or even unique. I picked triangles because it seems intuitively less meaningful to speak about a “re-presentation” of a triangle, as it would not seem to be meaningful to talk about a “re-presentation” of a triangle, given that a representation of a triangle is simply a triangle (or at least no less a triangle than anything else with the geometric properties we would usually consider constitute a triangle). It might be meaningful to refer to a representation of a particular instance of a triangle (for example a drawing of a particular triangle painting in a gallery), but it wouldn't seem to make sense to say of any triangle that it is a “re-presentation” of the shape known as a triangle. In short, there is no other reason I use the example of the triangle other than to avoid confusion about questions of representation.

Another response might be something along the lines of, "But for someone who thinks that everything ultimately boils down to physical things and their interactions, and yet has already accepted that neural activity doesn't have to be isomorphic with mental activity, surely this isn't a problem?" The strangeness of such a view is illustrated by the point that if the brain is analogous to a computer that renders a triangle on a screen, there is no physical counterpart to the screen in the analogy. Or in other words, there is a lack of physical instantiation of the dream triangle as a triangle (with the geometric properties of a triangle). Given that all other triangles that exist "externally" are physically instantiated as triangles, to suggest that this doesn’t apply to dream triangles seems like special pleading.

Finally, another counter argument might be that, in fact, a triangle is instantiated as a triangle in a computer simulation, even without it being outputted to any visual display. Yet, I see no reason to believe this is the case. For example, in a 2D graphics framework, the instruction for a triangle would be: “triangle(x1, y1, x2, y2, x3, y3)”. Essentially, this is just a way of instructing the software to take three sets of ordered pairs and make three points on a grid and draw lines between them. Or, to simplify it even further, the user is doing little more than writing an instruction to make specific pixels light up on the computer’s monitor. These instructions only make sense if you have a visual display that is set up in a rectangular grid with pixels arranged in a certain order. Furthermore, it only works or even makes sense if there is a display device designed such that the human eye can perceive and interpret it.

A further way of clarifying this point is to imagine a simulation with several triangles moving randomly in a 2D framework. The simplest rule of the simulation is, "If a point of a triangle touches another, it disappears. The last triangle that survives is shown on screen.” Would it be correct to consider the triangles that have disappeared as currently "instantiated" as triangles? The answer is no. Thinking the instructions for rendering the triangles are triangles themselves is akin to thinking you can feed someone with a recipe rather than actual food.

While I’m aware that this thought experiment cannot be considered to conclusively prove any metaphysical thesis to be true or false, my hope is that it might trigger a change of aspect.

Here is a brief summary of the argument, broken down into bullet points:

    In a computer simulation, what we perceive as a triangle is the result of programming code that defines behaviours and properties, but it does not create a triangle within the computer’s memory or processing units.

    The simulation contains the potential for a triangle, but this potential is not realised as a physical shape until it is rendered on a screen.

    When the simulation is run and the image is displayed on a screen, the pixels align to create the visual form of a triangle. This is the moment when it can be said that the triangle exists physically, as a pattern of light on the screen.

    Unlike the triangles in simulations that are physically instantiated on screens or other visual displays, triangles in dreams do not have a physical form or location.

    The dream triangle, while it may have neural correlates, is not instantiated as a triangle in the brain or anywhere else in physical space. Here, there is no equivalent to the screen in the computer simulation analogy.

    This distinction reinforces the argument that not all experiences of triangles are physically instantiated.

    It supports the position that the mind can experience dream triangles in a non-physical way.

    This of course does not necessarily solely apply to dream triangles, but potentially myriad mental phenomena.

Or, even more simply:

    It is contradictory to say a triangle isn’t a triangle.

    It is tautologous to say a triangle is a triangle.

    Therefore a triangle in a dream is a triangle.

    A dream triangle is not instantiated, as a triangle, in the physical.

    Therefore a dream triangle is a triangle, but it is not physical.

    Therefore there is more to reality than the physical.

In conclusion, the dream triangle thought experiment serves as a powerful intuition pump, challenging the notion that all aspects of reality can be reduced to physical properties and processes. By highlighting the unique nature of dream triangles – their lack of physical instantiation despite possessing the geometric properties that define triangularity – the thought experiment exposes a significant limitation in purely physicalist accounts of the mind. While some may attempt to dismiss the dream triangle as a mere representational quirk or an exception to be explained away by future scientific advancements, such objections fail to grasp the fundamental ontological and epistemological issues at stake. The dream triangle is not simply an anomaly to be smoothed over, but a vivid illustration of the hard problem of consciousness; the difficulty of accounting for the subjective, phenomenal qualities of experience in terms of objective, physical processes.

Of course, no thought experiment can definitively prove or disprove a metaphysical thesis. The dream triangle argument does not, in itself, establish the truth of dualism, idealism, or any other non-physicalist ontology. What it does, however, is provide a compelling reason to question the adequacy of reductive materialism as a comprehensive framework for understanding the nature of reality. By inviting us to consider the manifest reality of conscious experience, even in the absence of physical instantiation, the dream triangle prompts us to explore alternative models of the mind-matter relationship – models that can accommodate the irreducibility of experience and the seemingly non-physical dimensions of mental life.

This is not to suggest that we should abandon the methods and findings of empirical science, or retreat into a realm of unconstrained metaphysical speculation. Rather, it is to recognise that a truly comprehensive and adequate understanding of reality may require us to expand our ontological and epistemological frameworks beyond the strictures of classical physicalism. The dream triangle thought experiment, in this sense, is an invitation to intellectual humility and openness.
